Mathematics From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigationJump to
search This article is about the field of study. For other uses, see Mathematics
(disambiguation) and Math (disambiguation).

Greek mathematician Euclid (holding calipers), 3rd century BC, as imagined by
Raphael in this detail from The School of Athens (1509–1511)[a] Mathematics
Alphabetical indices 0–9 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
Mathematicians A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Navigation
ListsOutlinePortalCategories vte Mathematics (from Greek: μάθημα, máthēma,
'knowledge, study, learning') includes the study of such topics as quantity
(number theory),[1] structure (algebra),[2] space (geometry),[1] and change
(mathematical analysis).[3][4][5] It has no generally accepted definition.[6][7]

Mathematicians seek and use patterns[8][9] to formulate new conjectures; they
resolve the truth or falsity of such by mathematical proof. When mathematical
structures are good models of real phenomena, mathematical reasoning can be used
to provide insight or predictions about nature. Through the use of abstraction
and logic, mathematics developed from counting, calculation, measurement, and
the systematic study of the shapes and motions of physical objects. Practical
mathematics has been a human activity from as far back as written records
exist. The research required to solve mathematical problems can take years or
even centuries of sustained inquiry.

Rigorous arguments first appeared in Greek mathematics, most notably in Euclid's
Elements.[10] Since the pioneering work of Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932), David
Hilbert (1862–1943), and others on axiomatic systems in the late 19th century,
it has become customary to view mathematical research as establishing truth by
rigorous deduction from appropriately chosen axioms and definitions. Mathematics
developed at a relatively slow pace until the Renaissance, when mathematical
innovations interacting with new scientific discoveries led to a rapid increase
in the rate of mathematical discovery that has continued to the present day.[11]

Mathematics is essential in many fields, including natural science, engineering,
medicine, finance, and the social sciences. Applied mathematics has led to
entirely new mathematical disciplines, such as statistics and game
theory. Mathematicians engage in pure mathematics (mathematics for its own sake)
without having any application in mind, but practical applications for what
began as pure mathematics are often discovered later.[12][13]


Contents 1 History 1.1 Etymology 2 Definitions of mathematics 2.1 Three leading
types 2.2 Mathematics as science 3 Inspiration, pure and applied mathematics,
and aesthetics 4 Notation, language, and rigor 5 Fields of mathematics 5.1
Foundations and philosophy 5.2 Pure mathematics 5.3 Applied mathematics 6
Mathematical awards 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 Further
reading History Main article: History of mathematics The history of mathematics
can be seen as an ever-increasing series of abstractions. The first abstraction,
which is shared by many animals,[14] was probably that of numbers: the
realization that a collection of two apples and a collection of two oranges (for
example) have something in common, namely quantity of their members.

As evidenced by tallies found on bone, in addition to recognizing how to count
physical objects, prehistoric peoples may have also recognized how to count
abstract quantities, like time—days, seasons, or years.[15][16]


The Babylonian mathematical tablet Plimpton 322, dated to 1800 BC.  Evidence for
more complex mathematics does not appear until around 3000 BC, when the
Babylonians and Egyptians began using arithmetic, algebra and geometry for
taxation and other financial calculations, for building and construction, and
for astronomy.[17] The most ancient mathematical texts from Mesopotamia and
Egypt are from 2000–1800 BC.[18] Many early texts mention Pythagorean triples
and so, by inference, the Pythagorean theorem seems to be the most ancient and
widespread mathematical development after basic arithmetic and geometry.[19] It
is in Babylonian mathematics that elementary arithmetic (addition, subtraction,
multiplication and division) first appear in the archaeological record. The
Babylonians also possessed a place-value system, and used a sexagesimal numeral
system [19] which is still in use today for measuring angles and time.[20]


Archimedes used the method of exhaustion to approximate the value of pi.
Beginning in the 6th century BC with the Pythagoreans, the Ancient Greeks began
a systematic study of mathematics as a subject in its own right with Greek
mathematics.[21] Around 300 BC, Euclid introduced the axiomatic method still
used in mathematics today, consisting of definition, axiom, theorem, and
proof. His textbook Elements is widely considered the most successful and
influential textbook of all time.[22] The greatest mathematician of antiquity is
often held to be Archimedes (c. 287–212 BC) of Syracuse.[23] He developed
formulas for calculating the surface area and volume of solids of revolution and
used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola
with the summation of an infinite series, in a manner not too dissimilar from
modern calculus.[24] Other notable achievements of Greek mathematics are conic
sections (Apollonius of Perga, 3rd century BC),[25] trigonometry (Hipparchus of
Nicaea (2nd century BC),[26] and the beginnings of algebra (Diophantus, 3rd
century AD).[27]


The numerals used in the Bakhshali manuscript, dated between the 2nd century BC
and the 2nd century AD.  The Hindu–Arabic numeral system and the rules for the
use of its operations, in use throughout the world today, evolved over the
course of the first millennium AD in India and were transmitted to the Western
world via Islamic mathematics.[28] Other notable developments of Indian
mathematics include the modern definition and approximation of sine and
cosine,[28] and an early form of infinite series.


A page from al-Khwārizmī's Algebra During the Golden Age of Islam, especially
during the 9th and 10th centuries, mathematics saw many important innovations
building on Greek mathematics. The most notable achievement of Islamic
mathematics was the development of algebra. Other notable achievements of the
Islamic period are advances in spherical trigonometry and the addition of the
decimal point to the Arabic numeral system.[29][30] Many notable mathematicians
from this period were Persian, such as Al-Khwarismi, Omar Khayyam and Sharaf
al-Dīn al-Ṭūsī.

During the early modern period, mathematics began to develop at an accelerating
pace in Western Europe. The development of calculus by Newton and Leibniz in the
17th century revolutionized mathematics.[31] Leonhard Euler was the most notable
mathematician of the 18th century, contributing numerous theorems and
discoveries.[32] Perhaps the foremost mathematician of the 19th century was the
German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss,[33] who made numerous contributions
to fields such as algebra, analysis, differential geometry, matrix theory,
number theory, and statistics. In the early 20th century, Kurt Gödel transformed
mathematics by publishing his incompleteness theorems, which show in part that
any consistent axiomatic system—if powerful enough to describe arithmetic—will
contain true propositions that cannot be proved.[34]

Mathematics has since been greatly extended, and there has been a fruitful
interaction between mathematics and science, to the benefit of
both. Mathematical discoveries continue to be made today. According to Mikhail
B. Sevryuk, in the January 2006 issue of the Bulletin of the American
Mathematical Society, "The number of papers and books included in the
Mathematical Reviews database since 1940 (the first year of operation of MR) is
now more than 1.9 million, and more than 75 thousand items are added to the
database each year. The overwhelming majority of works in this ocean contain new
mathematical theorems and their proofs."[35]

Etymology The word mathematics comes from Ancient Greek máthēma (μάθημα),
meaning "that which is learnt,"[36] "what one gets to know," hence also "study"
and "science". The word for "mathematics" came to have the narrower and more
technical meaning "mathematical study" even in Classical times.[37] Its
adjective is mathēmatikós (μαθηματικός), meaning "related to learning" or
"studious," which likewise further came to mean "mathematical." In particular,
mathēmatikḗ tékhnē (μαθηματικὴ τέχνη; Latin: ars mathematica) meant "the
mathematical art."

Similarly, one of the two main schools of thought in Pythagoreanism was known as
the mathēmatikoi (μαθηματικοί)—which at the time meant "learners" rather than
"mathematicians" in the modern sense.[38]

In Latin, and in English until around 1700, the term mathematics more commonly
meant "astrology" (or sometimes "astronomy") rather than "mathematics"; the
meaning gradually changed to its present one from about 1500 to 1800. This has
resulted in several mistranslations. For example, Saint Augustine's warning that
Christians should beware of mathematici, meaning astrologers, is sometimes
mistranslated as a condemnation of mathematicians.[39]

The apparent plural form in English, like the French plural form les
mathématiques (and the less commonly used singular derivative la mathématique),
goes back to the Latin neuter plural mathematica (Cicero), based on the Greek
plural ta mathēmatiká (τὰ μαθηματικά), used by Aristotle (384–322 BC), and
meaning roughly "all things mathematical", although it is plausible that English
borrowed only the adjective mathematic(al) and formed the noun mathematics anew,
after the pattern of physics and metaphysics, which were inherited from
Greek.[40] In English, the noun mathematics takes a singular verb. It is often
shortened to maths or, in North America, math.[41]

Definitions of mathematics

Leonardo Fibonacci, the Italian mathematician who introduced the Hindu–Arabic
numeral system invented between the 1st and 4th centuries by Indian
mathematicians, to the Western World.  Main article: Definitions of mathematics
Mathematics has no generally accepted definition.[6][7] Aristotle defined
mathematics as "the science of quantity" and this definition prevailed until the
18th century. However, Aristotle also noted a focus on quantity alone may not
distinguish mathematics from sciences like physics; in his view, abstraction and
studying quantity as a property "separable in thought" from real instances set
mathematics apart.[42]

In the 19th century, when the study of mathematics increased in rigor and began
to address abstract topics such as group theory and projective geometry, which
have no clear-cut relation to quantity and measurement, mathematicians and
philosophers began to propose a variety of new definitions.[43]

A great many professional mathematicians take no interest in a definition of
mathematics, or consider it undefinable.[6] There is not even consensus on
whether mathematics is an art or a science.[7] Some just say, "Mathematics is
what mathematicians do."[6]

Three leading types Three leading types of definition of mathematics today are
called logicist, intuitionist, and formalist, each reflecting a different
philosophical school of thought.[44] All have severe flaws, none has widespread
acceptance, and no reconciliation seems possible.[44]

Logicist definitions An early definition of mathematics in terms of logic was
that of Benjamin Peirce (1870): "the science that draws necessary
conclusions."[45] In the Principia Mathematica, Bertrand Russell and Alfred
North Whitehead advanced the philosophical program known as logicism, and
attempted to prove that all mathematical concepts, statements, and principles
can be defined and proved entirely in terms of symbolic logic. A logicist
definition of mathematics is Russell's (1903) "All Mathematics is Symbolic
Logic."[46]

Intuitionist definitions Intuitionist definitions, developing from the
philosophy of mathematician L. E. J. Brouwer, identify mathematics with certain
mental phenomena. An example of an intuitionist definition is "Mathematics is
the mental activity which consists in carrying out constructs one after the
other."[44] A peculiarity of intuitionism is that it rejects some mathematical
ideas considered valid according to other definitions. In particular, while
other philosophies of mathematics allow objects that can be proved to exist even
though they cannot be constructed, intuitionism allows only mathematical objects
that one can actually construct. Intuitionists also reject the law of excluded
middle—a stance which forces them to reject proof by contradiction as a viable
proof method as well.[47]

Formalist definitions Formalist definitions identify mathematics with its
symbols and the rules for operating on them. Haskell Curry defined mathematics
simply as "the science of formal systems".[48] A formal system is a set of
symbols, or tokens, and some rules on how the tokens are to be combined into
formulas. In formal systems, the word axiom has a special meaning different from
the ordinary meaning of "a self-evident truth", and is used to refer to a
combination of tokens that is included in a given formal system without needing
to be derived using the rules of the system.

Mathematics as science

Carl Friedrich Gauss, known as the prince of mathematicians The German
mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss referred to mathematics as "the Queen of the
Sciences".[49] More recently, Marcus du Sautoy has called mathematics "the Queen
of Science ... the main driving force behind scientific discovery".[50] The
philosopher Karl Popper observed that "most mathematical theories are, like
those of physics and biology, hypothetico-deductive: pure mathematics therefore
turns out to be much closer to the natural sciences whose hypotheses are
conjectures, than it seemed even recently."[51] Popper also noted that "I shall
certainly admit a system as empirical or scientific only if it is capable of
being tested by experience."[52]

Several authors consider that mathematics is not a science because it does not
rely on empirical evidence.[53][54][55][56]

Mathematics shares much in common with many fields in the physical sciences,
notably the exploration of the logical consequences of assumptions. Intuition
and experimentation also play a role in the formulation of conjectures in both
mathematics and the (other) sciences. Experimental mathematics continues to grow
in importance within mathematics, and computation and simulation are playing an
increasing role in both the sciences and mathematics.

The opinions of mathematicians on this matter are varied. Many
mathematicians[57] feel that to call their area a science is to downplay the
importance of its aesthetic side, and its history in the traditional seven
liberal arts; others feel that to ignore its connection to the sciences is to
turn a blind eye to the fact that the interface between mathematics and its
applications in science and engineering has driven much development in
mathematics.[58] One way this difference of viewpoint plays out is in the
philosophical debate as to whether mathematics is created (as in art) or
discovered (as in science). In practice, mathematicians are typically grouped
with scientists at the gross level but separated at finer levels. This is one of
many issues considered in the philosophy of mathematics.[59]

Inspiration, pure and applied mathematics, and aesthetics Main article:
Mathematical beauty Isaac Newton Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz Isaac Newton
(left) and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz developed infinitesimal calculus.
Mathematics arises from many different kinds of problems. At first these were
found in commerce, land measurement, architecture and later astronomy; today,
all sciences suggest problems studied by mathematicians, and many problems arise
within mathematics itself. For example, the physicist Richard Feynman invented
the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics using a combination of
mathematical reasoning and physical insight, and today's string theory, a
still-developing scientific theory which attempts to unify the four fundamental
forces of nature, continues to inspire new mathematics.[60]

Some mathematics is relevant only in the area that inspired it, and is applied
to solve further problems in that area. But often mathematics inspired by one
area proves useful in many areas, and joins the general stock of mathematical
concepts. A distinction is often made between pure mathematics and applied
mathematics. However pure mathematics topics often turn out to have
applications, e.g. number theory in cryptography. This remarkable fact, that
even the "purest" mathematics often turns out to have practical applications, is
what Eugene Wigner has called "the unreasonable effectiveness of
mathematics".[13] As in most areas of study, the explosion of knowledge in the
scientific age has led to specialization: there are now hundreds of specialized
areas in mathematics and the latest Mathematics Subject Classification runs to
46 pages.[61] Several areas of applied mathematics have merged with related
traditions outside of mathematics and become disciplines in their own right,
including statistics, operations research, and computer science.

For those who are mathematically inclined, there is often a definite aesthetic
aspect to much of mathematics. Many mathematicians talk about the elegance of
mathematics, its intrinsic aesthetics and inner beauty. Simplicity and
generality are valued. There is beauty in a simple and elegant proof, such as
Euclid's proof that there are infinitely many prime numbers, and in an elegant
numerical method that speeds calculation, such as the fast Fourier
transform. G. H. Hardy in A Mathematician's Apology expressed the belief that
these aesthetic considerations are, in themselves, sufficient to justify the
study of pure mathematics. He identified criteria such as significance,
unexpectedness, inevitability, and economy as factors that contribute to a
mathematical aesthetic.[62] Mathematical research often seeks critical features
of a mathematical object. A theorem expressed as a characterization of the
object by these features is the prize. Examples of particularly succinct and
revelatory mathematical arguments has been published in Proofs from THE BOOK.

The popularity of recreational mathematics is another sign of the pleasure many
find in solving mathematical questions. And at the other social extreme,
philosophers continue to find problems in philosophy of mathematics, such as the
nature of mathematical proof.[63]

Notation, language, and rigor Main article: Mathematical notation

Leonhard Euler created and popularized much of the mathematical notation used
today.  Most of the mathematical notation in use today was not invented until
the 16th century.[64] Before that, mathematics was written out in words,
limiting mathematical discovery.[65] Euler (1707–1783) was responsible for many
of the notations in use today. Modern notation makes mathematics much easier for
the professional, but beginners often find it daunting. According to Barbara
Oakley, this can be attributed to the fact that mathematical ideas are both more
abstract and more encrypted than those of natural language.[66] Unlike natural
language, where people can often equate a word (such as cow) with the physical
object it corresponds to, mathematical symbols are abstract, lacking any
physical analog.[67] Mathematical symbols are also more highly encrypted than
regular words, meaning a single symbol can encode a number of different
operations or ideas.[68]

Mathematical language can be difficult to understand for beginners because even
common terms, such as or and only, have a more precise meaning than they have in
everyday speech, and other terms such as open and field refer to specific
mathematical ideas, not covered by their laymen's meanings. Mathematical
language also includes many technical terms such as homeomorphism and integrable
that have no meaning outside of mathematics. Additionally, shorthand phrases
such as iff for "if and only if" belong to mathematical jargon. There is a
reason for special notation and technical vocabulary: mathematics requires more
precision than everyday speech. Mathematicians refer to this precision of
language and logic as "rigor".

Mathematical proof is fundamentally a matter of rigor. Mathematicians want their
theorems to follow from axioms by means of systematic reasoning. This is to
avoid mistaken "theorems", based on fallible intuitions, of which many instances
have occurred in the history of the subject.[b] The level of rigor expected in
mathematics has varied over time: the Greeks expected detailed arguments, but at
the time of Isaac Newton the methods employed were less rigorous. Problems
inherent in the definitions used by Newton would lead to a resurgence of careful
analysis and formal proof in the 19th century. Misunderstanding the rigor is a
cause for some of the common misconceptions of mathematics. Today,
mathematicians continue to argue among themselves about computer-assisted
proofs. Since large computations are hard to verify, such proofs may be
erroneous if the used computer program is erroneous.[c][69] On the other hand,
proof assistants allow verifying all details that cannot be given in a
hand-written proof, and provide certainty of the correctness of long proofs such
as that of the Feit–Thompson theorem.[d]

Axioms in traditional thought were "self-evident truths", but that conception is
problematic.[70] At a formal level, an axiom is just a string of symbols, which
has an intrinsic meaning only in the context of all derivable formulas of an
axiomatic system. It was the goal of Hilbert's program to put all of mathematics
on a firm axiomatic basis, but according to Gödel's incompleteness theorem every
(sufficiently powerful) axiomatic system has undecidable formulas; and so a
final axiomatization of mathematics is impossible. Nonetheless mathematics is
often imagined to be (as far as its formal content) nothing but set theory in
some axiomatization, in the sense that every mathematical statement or proof
could be cast into formulas within set theory.[71]

Fields of mathematics See also: Areas of mathematics and Glossary of areas of
mathematics

The abacus is a simple calculating tool used since ancient times.  Mathematics
can, broadly speaking, be subdivided into the study of quantity, structure,
space, and change (i.e. arithmetic, algebra, geometry, and analysis). In
addition to these main concerns, there are also subdivisions dedicated to
exploring links from the heart of mathematics to other fields: to logic, to set
theory (foundations), to the empirical mathematics of the various sciences
(applied mathematics), and more recently to the rigorous study of
uncertainty. While some areas might seem unrelated, the Langlands program has
found connections between areas previously thought unconnected, such as Galois
groups, Riemann surfaces and number theory.

Discrete mathematics conventionally groups together the fields of mathematics
which study mathematical structures that are fundamentally discrete rather than
continuous.

Foundations and philosophy In order to clarify the foundations of mathematics,
the fields of mathematical logic and set theory were developed. Mathematical
logic includes the mathematical study of logic and the applications of formal
logic to other areas of mathematics; set theory is the branch of mathematics
that studies sets or collections of objects. The phrase "crisis of foundations"
describes the search for a rigorous foundation for mathematics that took place
from approximately 1900 to 1930.[72] Some disagreement about the foundations of
mathematics continues to the present day. The crisis of foundations was
stimulated by a number of controversies at the time, including the controversy
over Cantor's set theory and the Brouwer–Hilbert controversy.

Mathematical logic is concerned with setting mathematics within a rigorous
axiomatic framework, and studying the implications of such a framework. As such,
it is home to Gödel's incompleteness theorems which (informally) imply that any
effective formal system that contains basic arithmetic, if sound (meaning that
all theorems that can be proved are true), is necessarily incomplete (meaning
that there are true theorems which cannot be proved in that system). Whatever
finite collection of number-theoretical axioms is taken as a foundation, Gödel
showed how to construct a formal statement that is a true number-theoretical
fact, but which does not follow from those axioms. Therefore, no formal system
is a complete axiomatization of full number theory. Modern logic is divided into
recursion theory, model theory, and proof theory, and is closely linked to
theoretical computer science,[citation needed] as well as to category theory. In
the context of recursion theory, the impossibility of a full axiomatization of
number theory can also be formally demonstrated as a consequence of the MRDP
theorem.

Theoretical computer science includes computability theory, computational
complexity theory, and information theory. Computability theory examines the
limitations of various theoretical models of the computer, including the most
well-known model—the Turing machine. Complexity theory is the study of
tractability by computer; some problems, although theoretically solvable by
computer, are so expensive in terms of time or space that solving them is likely
to remain practically unfeasible, even with the rapid advancement of computer
hardware. A famous problem is the "P = NP?" problem, one of the Millennium Prize
Problems.[73] Finally, information theory is concerned with the amount of data
that can be stored on a given medium, and hence deals with concepts such as
compression and entropy.

{\displaystyle p\Rightarrow q}{\displaystyle p\Rightarrow q} Venn A intersect
B.svg Commutative diagram for morphism.svg DFAexample.svg Mathematical logic Set
theory Category theory Theory of computation Pure mathematics Main article: Pure
mathematics Quantity Main article: Arithmetic The study of quantity starts with
numbers, first the familiar natural numbers and integers ("whole numbers") and
arithmetical operations on them, which are characterized in arithmetic. The
deeper properties of integers are studied in number theory, from which come such
popular results as Fermat's Last Theorem. The twin prime conjecture and
Goldbach's conjecture are two unsolved problems in number theory.

As the number system is further developed, the integers are recognized as a
subset of the rational numbers ("fractions"). These, in turn, are contained
within the real numbers, which are used to represent continuous quantities. Real
numbers are generalized to complex numbers. These are the first steps of a
hierarchy of numbers that goes on to include quaternions and
octonions. Consideration of the natural numbers also leads to the transfinite
numbers, which formalize the concept of "infinity". According to the fundamental
theorem of algebra all solutions of equations in one unknown with complex
coefficients are complex numbers, regardless of degree. Another area of study is
the size of sets, which is described with the cardinal numbers. These include
the aleph numbers, which allow meaningful comparison of the size of infinitely
large sets.

Natural numbers Integers Rational numbers Real numbers Complex numbers Infinite
cardinals Structure Main article: Algebra Many mathematical objects, such as
sets of numbers and functions, exhibit internal structure as a consequence of
operations or relations that are defined on the set. Mathematics then studies
properties of those sets that can be expressed in terms of that structure; for
instance number theory studies properties of the set of integers that can be
expressed in terms of arithmetic operations. Moreover, it frequently happens
that different such structured sets (or structures) exhibit similar properties,
which makes it possible, by a further step of abstraction, to state axioms for a
class of structures, and then study at once the whole class of structures
satisfying these axioms. Thus one can study groups, rings, fields and other
abstract systems; together such studies (for structures defined by algebraic
operations) constitute the domain of abstract algebra.

By its great generality, abstract algebra can often be applied to seemingly
unrelated problems; for instance a number of ancient problems concerning compass
and straightedge constructions were finally solved using Galois theory, which
involves field theory and group theory. Another example of an algebraic theory
is linear algebra, which is the general study of vector spaces, whose elements
called vectors have both quantity and direction, and can be used to model
(relations between) points in space. This is one example of the phenomenon that
the originally unrelated areas of geometry and algebra have very strong
interactions in modern mathematics. Combinatorics studies ways of enumerating
the number of objects that fit a given structure.

Elliptic curve simple.svg Rubik's cube.svg Group diagdram D6.svg Lattice of the
divisibility of 60.svg Braid-modular-group-cover.svg Combinatorics Number theory
Group theory Graph theory Order theory Algebra Space Main article: Geometry The
study of space originates with geometry—in particular, Euclidean geometry, which
combines space and numbers, and encompasses the well-known Pythagorean
theorem. Trigonometry is the branch of mathematics that deals with relationships
between the sides and the angles of triangles and with the trigonometric
functions. The modern study of space generalizes these ideas to include
higher-dimensional geometry, non-Euclidean geometries (which play a central role
in general relativity) and topology. Quantity and space both play a role in
analytic geometry, differential geometry, and algebraic geometry. Convex and
discrete geometry were developed to solve problems in number theory and
functional analysis but now are pursued with an eye on applications in
optimization and computer science. Within differential geometry are the concepts
of fiber bundles and calculus on manifolds, in particular, vector and tensor
calculus. Within algebraic geometry is the description of geometric objects as
solution sets of polynomial equations, combining the concepts of quantity and
space, and also the study of topological groups, which combine structure and
space. Lie groups are used to study space, structure, and change. Topology in
all its many ramifications may have been the greatest growth area in
20th-century mathematics; it includes point-set topology, set-theoretic
topology, algebraic topology and differential topology. In particular, instances
of modern-day topology are metrizability theory, axiomatic set theory, homotopy
theory, and Morse theory. Topology also includes the now solved Poincaré
conjecture, and the still unsolved areas of the Hodge conjecture. Other results
in geometry and topology, including the four color theorem and Kepler
conjecture, have been proven only with the help of computers.

Illustration to Euclid's proof of the Pythagorean theorem.svg Sinusvåg 400px.png
Hyperbolic triangle.svg Torus.svg Mandel zoom 07 satellite.jpg Measure
illustration (Vector).svg Geometry Trigonometry Differential geometry Topology
Fractal geometry Measure theory Change Main article: Calculus Understanding and
describing change is a common theme in the natural sciences, and calculus was
developed as a tool to investigate it. Functions arise here, as a central
concept describing a changing quantity. The rigorous study of real numbers and
functions of a real variable is known as real analysis, with complex analysis
the equivalent field for the complex numbers. Functional analysis focuses
attention on (typically infinite-dimensional) spaces of functions. One of many
applications of functional analysis is quantum mechanics. Many problems lead
naturally to relationships between a quantity and its rate of change, and these
are studied as differential equations. Many phenomena in nature can be described
by dynamical systems; chaos theory makes precise the ways in which many of these
systems exhibit unpredictable yet still deterministic behavior.

Integral as region under curve.svg Vector field.svg Navier Stokes Laminar.svg
Limitcycle.svg Lorenz attractor.svg Conformal grid after Möbius
transformation.svg Calculus Vector calculus Differential equations Dynamical
systems Chaos theory Complex analysis Applied mathematics Main article: Applied
mathematics Applied mathematics concerns itself with mathematical methods that
are typically used in science, engineering, business, and industry. Thus,
"applied mathematics" is a mathematical science with specialized knowledge. The
term applied mathematics also describes the professional specialty in which
mathematicians work on practical problems; as a profession focused on practical
problems, applied mathematics focuses on the "formulation, study, and use of
mathematical models" in science, engineering, and other areas of mathematical
practice.

In the past, practical applications have motivated the development of
mathematical theories, which then became the subject of study in pure
mathematics, where mathematics is developed primarily for its own sake. Thus,
the activity of applied mathematics is vitally connected with research in pure
mathematics.

Statistics and other decision sciences Main article: Statistics Applied
mathematics has significant overlap with the discipline of statistics, whose
theory is formulated mathematically, especially with probability
theory. Statisticians (working as part of a research project) "create data that
makes sense" with random sampling and with randomized experiments;[74] the
design of a statistical sample or experiment specifies the analysis of the data
(before the data be available). When reconsidering data from experiments and
samples or when analyzing data from observational studies, statisticians "make
sense of the data" using the art of modelling and the theory of inference—with
model selection and estimation; the estimated models and consequential
predictions should be tested on new data.[e]

Statistical theory studies decision problems such as minimizing the risk
(expected loss) of a statistical action, such as using a procedure in, for
example, parameter estimation, hypothesis testing, and selecting the best. In
these traditional areas of mathematical statistics, a statistical-decision
problem is formulated by minimizing an objective function, like expected loss or
cost, under specific constraints: For example, designing a survey often involves
minimizing the cost of estimating a population mean with a given level of
confidence.[75] Because of its use of optimization, the mathematical theory of
statistics shares concerns with other decision sciences, such as operations
research, control theory, and mathematical economics.[76]

Computational mathematics Computational mathematics proposes and studies methods
for solving mathematical problems that are typically too large for human
numerical capacity. Numerical analysis studies methods for problems in analysis
using functional analysis and approximation theory; numerical analysis includes
the study of approximation and discretisation broadly with special concern for
rounding errors. Numerical analysis and, more broadly, scientific computing also
study non-analytic topics of mathematical science, especially algorithmic matrix
and graph theory. Other areas of computational mathematics include computer
algebra and symbolic computation.